Proposed content of pathogenesis/transmission manuscript (#745)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/07.pathogenesis.md

Outcomes of the disease can include acute respiratory distress and acute lung injury, as well as damage to other organ systems [@doi:10.23750/abm.v91i1.9397; @doi:10.1002/ctm2.16].
Understanding the progression of the disease, including these diverse symptoms, depends on understanding how the virus interacts with the host.
Additionally, the fundamental biology of the virus can provide insights into how it is transmitted among people, which are in turn critical to efforts to control its spread.
As a result, a thorough understanding of the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is a critical foundation on which to build an understanding of COVID-19 and the pandemic as a whole.

The rapid identification and release of the genomic sequence of the virus in January 2020 [@doi:10.46234/ccdcw2020.017] provided early insight into the virus in a comparative genomic context.
The viral genomic sequence clusters with known coronaviruses (order *Nidovirales*, family *Coronaviridae*, subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae*).
Phylogenetic analysis of the coronaviruses reveals four major subclades, each corresponding to a genus: the alpha, beta, delta and gamma coronaviruses.

> Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].

Reviewer: ![Untitled (7)](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62564517/104540419-6da3e600-55ed-11eb-9852-e800098a118d.png)

> Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].

Reviewer: Let me know what you think!

> Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].

Reviewer 2: Awesome @nilswellhausen

> Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].

Reviewer 3: That's beautiful! Way better than anything i could've made:) Thank you

> Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [@doi:10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301].

Author: WOW! This is incredible!!!

The SARS-CoV-2 genome lies in the middle of this range at 29,903 bp [@doi:10/ggjr43].
Genome organization is highly conserved within the order [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1].
There are three major regions: one containing the replicase gene and one containing the genes encoding structural proteins [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1].
The replicase gene comprises about two-thirds of the genome and consists of two open reading frames that are translated with ribosomal frameshifting [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1].
This polypeptide is then translated into 16 non-structural proteins (nsp), except in Gammacoronaviruses where nsp1 is absent, that form replication machinery used to synthesize viral RNA [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25681].
The remaining third of the genome encodes structural proteins, including the spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins.

> Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two regions, depending on the species or strain. <!-- TODO: Add a figure showing the structure of the genome.-->

Reviewer 3: I think visuals are always very helpful. But I wouldn't say its urgent given that there definitely exists many online for people to google. I can try to work on making one but I don't think it needs to hold up the submission

> Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two regions, depending on the species or strain. <!-- TODO: Add a figure showing the structure of the genome.-->

Author: Thank you so much @ajlee21! @nilswellhausen is also incredibly talented at scientific visualization and may have thoughts!

> Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two regions, depending on the species or strain. <!-- TODO: Add a figure showing the structure of the genome.-->

Reviewer: Happy to put a figure together! Are you referring to the entire pathogenesis section or a figure for a specific part ? Either way, if someone wants to send me a basic drawing (can be pen and paper style) I can make it into a figure in less than 2 hours.

> Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two regions, depending on the species or strain. <!-- TODO: Add a figure showing the structure of the genome.-->

Reviewer 3: Amazing. I think this is a figure illustrating the structure of the CoV virion particle. So I was thinking something very basic like this: https://www.google.com/search?q=covid+structure&sxsrf=ALeKk02TWfkwENRf8nrvexytwQfQvuDy8A:1610588734617&tbm=isch&source=iu&ictx=1&fir=Pr35tXoGibc1uM%252C5oS0v-dQvEwIJM%252C_&vet=1&usg=AI4_-kRs2tvodunZgUxwkX-D9EGtwckM6A&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiEk5_LppruAhUMGVkFHYvpDRMQ9QF6BAgYEAE&biw=2076&bih=1456#imgrc=Pr35tXoGibc1uM

For SARS-CoV-2 infection leading to COVID-19, early reports described a CSS-like response in patients with particularly severe infections [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.24.963348; @doi:10/ggnzmc; @doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.06.017].
Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, 112 out of 191 (59%) developed sepsis, including all 54 of the non-survivors [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
However, the argument has been made that while the cytokine levels observed in COVID-19 patients fall outside of the normal range, they are not be as high as typically found in patients with ARDS [@doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.3313].
Regardless, inflammation has received significant interest both in regards to the pathology of COVID-19 as well as potential avenues for treatment, as the similarities between the cytokine storm and the pathophysiology of COVID-19 has led to the suggestion that a number of immunomodulatory pharmaceutical interventions could hold therapeutic value for the treatment of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102452] [cite therapeutics section].

> #### Pediatric Presentation

Reviewer 2: Done @rando2 , let me know if you want more detail :)

As more information is uncovered about the pathogenesis of HCoV and SARS-CoV-2 specifically, the diverse symptomology of COVID-19 has and likely will continue to conform with the ever-broadening understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 functions within a human host.

While the SARS-CoV-2 virus is very similar to other HCoV in several ways, including in its genomic structure and the structure of the virus itself, there are also some differences that may account for differences in the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the SARS and MERS of the past two decades.
The R~0~ of SARS-CoV-2 has been estimated to be similar to SARS-CoV-1 but much higher than that of MERS-CoV [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029; @doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029]. 
While the structures of the viruses are very similar, evolution among these species may account for differences in their transmissibility and virulence.
For example, the acquisition of a furin cleavage site the S1/S2 boundary within the SARS-CoV-2 S protein may be associated with increased virulence.
Additionally, concerns have been raised about the accumulation of mutations within the SARS-CoV-2 species itself, and whether these could influence virulence [cite evolution].

> The coming of age of genomic technologies has made these types of analyses feasible, and genomics research that characterize changes in SARS-CoV-2 along with temporal and spatial movement is likely to provide additional insights into whether within-species evolution influences the effect of the virus on the human host.

Author: ```suggestion
The coming of age of genomic technologies has made these types of analyses feasible, and genomics research characterizing changes in SARS-CoV-2 along with temporal and spatial movement is likely to provide additional insights into whether within-species evolution influences the effect of the virus on the human host.
```
Minor change to @ajlee21's text suggestion

### Conclusions

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is the third HCoV to emerge in the 21st century, and research into previous HCoVs has provided a strong foundation for characterizing the pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Critical insights into how the virus interacts with human cells have been gained from previous research in HCoV and other viral infections.
As with other HCoV, the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is likely driven by detection of its spike protein, which allows it to enter cells through the ACE2 receptor.
Epithelial cells have also emerged as the major cellular target of the virus, contextualizing the respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms that are frequently observed in COVID-19.
Many of the mechanisms that facilitate the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are currently under consideration as possible targets for the treatment or prevention of COVID-19 [cite therapeutics].
Research in other viruses also provides a foundation for understanding the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among people and can therefore inform efforts to control the virus's spread.

> While the extent to which aerosol and fomite transmission play a role in the spread of SARS-CoV-2, in general this virus seems to be spread primarily by droplet transmission, much like SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV.

Reviewer 2: I was reading the transmission section and this conclusion. I think there is a lot less emphasis these days on fomite transmission and much more emphasis on transmission by respiratory droplets within close contact. Certainly fomite transmission does occur, but the CDC does not acknowledge it as the main route. I would have edited, but I don’t know who wrote this section so they may want to review it themselves.

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/scientific-brief-sars-cov-2.html
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/faq.html#Spread

> While the extent to which aerosol and fomite transmission play a role in the spread of SARS-CoV-2, in general this virus seems to be spread primarily by droplet transmission, much like SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV.

Reviewer 2: This is perfect @rando2

While many efforts have focused on adults, and especially older adults because of the susceptibility of this demographic, additional research is needed to understand the presentation of COVID-19 and MIS-C in pediatric patients.
As more information is uncovered about the pathogenesis of HCoV and SARS-CoV-2 specifically, the diverse symptomology of COVID-19 has and likely will continue to conform with the ever-broadening understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 functions within a human host.

While the SARS-CoV-2 virus is very similar to other HCoV in several ways, including in its genomic structure and the structure of the virus itself, there are also some differences that may account for differences in the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the SARS and MERS of the past two decades.
The R~0~ of SARS-CoV-2 has been estimated to be similar to SARS-CoV-1 but much higher than that of MERS-CoV [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029; @doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029]. 

> While the structure of the viruses are very similar, evolution among these species may account for differences in their transmissibility and virulence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the structures of the viruses are very similar, evolution among these species may account for differences in their transmissibility and virulence.
```
